JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: the
latest from
Brussels, as the manhunt expands
to a new
suspect, and Europe's emergency
meeting to
thwart future attacks.
Then: a day of reckoning for
Radovan Karadzic,
the Bosnian Serb leader
convicted of genocide
for orchestrating atrocities
during the war.
And Making Sense of our economic
anxiety -- a
conservative economist's take on
what's fueling
the anger on display this
election.
CHARLES MURRAY, American
Enterprise Institute:
Trumpism is the expression by
the white working
class of a lot of legitimate
grievances that
it has with the ruling class.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Belgian officials
came under
mounting pressure over Tuesday's
terror attacks
in Brussels, Islamic State
bombers that killed
31 people and wounded 200 on
Tuesday -- 270
on Tuesday. Now the list of
suspects is growing,
along with questions about how
it could have
happened.
Malcolm Brabant reports on the
day's developments
from Brussels.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Security at
Brussels' Malcolm
Brabant metro station eased
slightly today,
but police and barriers remained
in place.
One of the suicide bombers,
Khalid El Bakraoui,
struck there on Tuesday. Reports
today said
investigators now believe a
second, unidentified
person was involved in the
subway attack,
and may still be at large.
El Bakraoui's brother, Ibrahim,
and another
man blew themselves up at the
airport. A third
man spotted there is also being
sought. But
concerns are growing about why
the authorities
didn't foil the plot.
Belgium's justice and interior
ministers offered
their resignations today, but
neither was
accepted.
JAN JAMBON, Belgian Interior
Minister (through
translator): If you put
everything in a row,
then you can say that you can
indeed ask big
questions in a number of areas
about the Justice
Department and the developments
afterwards
and also about the police.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This canal is
an emblem of
Belgium's problems. On the left
side is Brussels,
on the right, Molenbeek, a poor,
mostly Muslim
district, many from North
Africa. It's a place
regarded as a no-go zone by many
ethnic Belgians.
The army is now protecting the
police station
not far from the hideaway of
Salah Abdeslam,
the sole survivor of last
November's Paris
attacks, who was captured last
week. Molenbeek
has been the launch pad for
numerous jihadis,
including fighters who've joined
Islamic State
in Syria and Iraq.
But the district's deputy mayor,
Ahmed El
Khannouss, resents suggestions
that it is
Europe's main jihadi breeding
ground.
AHMED EL KHANNOUSS, Molenbeek
Deputy Mayor
(through translator): Molenbeek
is not a bastion
of terrorism. Molenbeek is not a
fertile ground
for terrorism. There is no
lawless area in
Molenbeek. That doesn't mean
there are not
any problems. We have big
problems, and this
is just one of them. It's true
that Molenbeek
has a link with certain
terrorist activities
because the perpetrators passed
through here,
but the local and national
authorities were
not aware of it.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It increasingly
appears that
the same ISIS network was behind
both the
attacks in Brussels and in Paris
last November.
Salah Abdeslam was summoned to
court in Brussels
today. His lawyer said he no
longer opposes
extradition to France.
SVEN MARY, Attorney for Salah
Abdeslam: In
the beginning, he wanted that
his extradition
to France took some more time.
Yesterday,
he changed his mind.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This was also
the first of
three days of mourning in
Belgium, and the
prime minister spoke ahead of
another moment
of silence, saying his nation
was hit at its
heart.
CHARLES MICHEL, Belgian Prime
Minister (through
translator): At the airport, at
the subway
station, the liberty of daily
life was slaughtered.
That same liberty is at the
foundation of
our democracy, our desire to
live together
in harmony, that same liberty
upon which the
European project was built.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Nearby, the
Place de la Bourse
has become the focal point for
grief, defiance
and solidarity. This young
Syrian held up
a sign today saying she may be a
Muslim, but
she's not a terrorist.
And Belgian Xavier Hannon came
here to chalk
a simple message on the
sidewalk. "For you
who have departed," he wrote.
XAVIER HANNON, Belgium (through
translator):
I came to write a couple of
words for my friend
who died in the metro. He was
just on his
way to a lesson. And now he will
never come
back. He had nothing to do with
this. We have
nothing to do with this. It's
not our war.
We're just young people.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Throughout
Brussels, was
evidence that this country is
involved in
a war with an enemy it can't
see. The army
was on guard at the main
Eurostar train station.
Every suitcase, however
harmless, represents
a potential threat in this
difficult climate.
And the Brussels Airport has
canceled flights
until at least Monday.
This afternoon, European Union
justice and
interior ministers held an
emergency meeting
to discuss enhancing security.
With more than
5,000 jihadis said to be roaming
Europe, the
issue could not be more urgent.
Nevertheless, the Belgian
authorities have
lowered the terror threat level,
despite saying
that another attack is -- quote
-- "likely
and possible" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. State
Department said
today that it's still trying to
account for
all the Americans known to have
been in Brussels
on Tuesday.
And this evening, French
authorities said
they have arrested a suspect in
Paris who
was planning an attack there.
In the day's other news: The
United States
has indicted seven computer
hackers for large-scale
attacks on American banks. They
worked for
companies tied to Iran's
government and its
hard-line Revolutionary Guard.
Between 2011
and 2013, they allegedly used
malware to attack
46 financial institutions.
In Washington today, Attorney
General Loretta
Lynch said the assault cost the
targets tens
of millions of dollars.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: The
attacks were relentless, they
were systematic,
and they were widespread. They
threatened
our economic well-being and our
ability to
compete fairly in the global
marketplace,
both of which are directly
linked to our national
security.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the
hackers also allegedly
accessed the controls of a small
dam outside
New York City, but did no
damage. All of the
suspects remain at large.
In Iraq, government troops
opened a military
offensive today to retake Mosul,
the country's
second largest city.
Special correspondent Jane
Ferguson is in
Iraq, and reports from Irbil.
JANE FERGUSON: Iraqi forces
spent weeks chipping
away at Islamic State positions
in the north.
And then, this morning, came the
announcement
on state television.
MAN (through translator): The
Iraqi security
troops have begun the conquest
operation of
liberating the Mosul region. Our
troops have
been waging pitched battles, and
they are
heading toward the drawn-up and
planned targets.
JANE FERGUSON: Officials said
Kurdish militia
and U.S. airstrikes are
supporting the assault.
Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi
tweeted, the
first stage was swift and
decisive. It began
by capturing several villages
near Makhmour,
about 40 miles south of Mosul.
The ultimate
goal is to reclaim Mosul itself.
ISIS forces captured the city in
June of 2014,
routing government troops, who
left behind
troves of weapons and
ammunition, even
American-supplied
vehicles and artillery pieces.
Since then, Iraq's army,
supported on the
ground by Shiite militias and
Iranian advisers,
has retaken Tikrit, oil-rich
Baiji and most
recently Ramadi. But Mosul,
which once had
a population of two million, is
by far its
biggest challenge.
In Washington today, a State
Department spokesman,
Mark Toner, said the U.S. is
standing by its
ally.
MARK TONER, State Department
Spokesman: We
certainly support and share with
the Iraqi
government its goal of
liberating Mosul as
quickly as possible, but this
has to be an
Iraqi led effort.
JANE FERGUSON: Already, there's
been an American
casualty linked to the battle
for Mosul. A
U.S. Marine was killed Saturday
by a rocket
attack near there. His newly
deployed unit
is helping defend an Iraqi
military base.
By all accounts, a decisive
victory in Mosul
is not going to be quick.
Instead, say Iraqi
military officials, the battle
will be a lengthy,
street-by-street, hard-fought
campaign. Today's
offensive is the very early
stage of that
battle, drawing the noose a
little tighter
around the biggest city under
Islamic State's
control.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Irbil.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the
Syrian government
announced its troops have fought
their way
into Palmyra, with support from
Russian airstrikes.
The Roman-era city is held by
Islamic State
fighters and lies at a key
crossroads in Central
Syria. State TV today showed
military units
entering the outskirts of
Palmyra. But they're
too late to save ancient
temples, tombs and
other artifacts already
destroyed by the militants.
Secretary of State John Kerry
and Russian
President Vladimir Putin talked
up prospects
for peace in Syria today. The
two men met
in Moscow. Kerry welcomed
Russia's withdrawal
of most of its military forces
from Syria.
Putin said that U.S./Russian
cooperation has
helped bring progress.
Meanwhile, the latest
round of Syrian peace talks
ended in Geneva.
They're to resume on April 9.
President Obama spent a final
day in Argentina,
paying tribute to victims of
brutal military
rule. And he acknowledged the
United States
was slow to condemn it. He
visited a memorial
to thousands killed in the
so-called Dirty
War from 1976 to 1983. It began
with the overthrow
of Argentina's government 40
years ago today,
and Mr. Obama discussed it later
at a briefing.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
The United States, when it
reflects on what
happened here, has to examine
its own policies
as well and its own past.
Democracies have
to have the courage to
acknowledge when we
don't live up to the ideals that
we stand
for. And we have been slow to
speak out for
human rights, and that was the
case here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
pledged to declassify
more military and intelligence
documents on
the issue. There've been
protests against
his visit, accusing the U.S. of
backing the
former military dictatorship.
Back in this country, a spring
blizzard that
blasted Denver is moving on,
into the Northern
Plains and the Midwest. High
winds and heavy
snow were reported today from
Wyoming to Michigan.
Up to a foot of snow blanketed
Minnesota's
Twin Cities, and parts of
Colorado got 30
inches. Denver International
Airport was fully
operational after canceling
almost all its
flights yesterday.
Vice President Joe Biden charged
today that
Senate Republicans have
distorted his past
remarks to justify blocking the
President
Obama's latest Supreme Court
nominee. In 1992,
then-Senator Biden warned that
the first President
Bush not name a court nominee
until after
that year's election. Today, he
said he was
simply urging consultation to
get a -- quote
-- "moderate nominee."
Wall Street finished a shortened
workweek
in quiet trading. The Dow Jones
industrial
average gained 13 points to
close at 17515.
The Nasdaq rose four points, and
the S&P 500
slipped a fraction. The markets
are closed
tomorrow for Good Friday.
Actor and comedian Garry
Shandling died today
in Los Angeles of an undisclosed
cause. He's
perhaps best known for his
Emmy-winning "Larry
Sanders Show," which debuted in
1992. Shandling
later won an American Comedy
Award in 1999.
He also hosted the Emmy Awards
show in 2004.
Garry Shandling was 66 years
old.
And, finally, after years of
rumor, archaeologists
have concluded that yes, William
Shakespeare's
skull seems to be missing. They
used ground-penetrating
radar to scan the playwright's
tomb at Holy
Trinity Church in
Stratford-Upon-Avon, England.
Until now, scholars dismissed
claims that
grave robbers stole the skull in
the 18th
century.
It's good to have all that
cleared up.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
The U.N.
finds a former Bosnian leader
guilty of genocide;
how North Carolina signed a bill
called the
most anti-LGBT law in the
country; why anger
over economics fuels
front-runner Donald Trump's
campaign; and much more.
Today was a day of reckoning for
the former
Bosnian-Serb leader Radovan
Karadzic, who
faced verdict in The Hague for
his actions
during the war in Bosnia in the
1990s.
We begin with this report from
James Mates
of Independent Television News.
The International Criminal
Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia is now in
session.
JAMES MATES: The wheels of
international justice
may turn painfully slowly, but
they do still
turn, and at least some of those
leaders who
commit crimes against humanity
one day pay
a price.
It's 24 years since this man,
Radovan Karadzic,
embarked on a brutal war in
Bosnia. He was
the leader of the Bosnian Serbs
who ordered
the siege of Sarajevo; 21 years
ago, men under
his command murdered 8,000
Muslim men and
boys at Srebrenica, the worst
act of genocide
since World War II.
MAN: Mr. Karadzic, could you
please stand?
JAMES MATES: Today, he was
cleared of one
charge of genocide, but that did
nothing to
mitigate the list of crimes he
was convicted
of.
MAN: Count two, genocide. Count
three, persecution
of crimes against humanity.
Count four, extermination,
a crime against humanity. Count
five, murder,
the crime against humanity.
JAMES MATES: The sentence for
these and six
more counts means this
65-year-old should
die in jail.
MAN: To a single sentence of 40,
4-0, years
of imprisonment.
JAMES MATES: Survivors,
relatives and victims
of Karadzic filed out of the
courtroom having
watched the verdict, among them
a man who
had been imprisoned in one of
the camps first
revealed to the world by ITV
News back in
1992. He was happy, but the
acquittal on one
of the two charges of genocide
hurt badly.
SATKO MUJAGIC, Survivor: But the
11o~th one
was about genocide in
(INAUDIBLE) where I
come and other municipalities
back in 1992,
in the time when actually whole
process of
genocide started and ended with
Srebrenica.
JAMES MATES: Karadzic's lawyer
emerged to
say his client continued to
maintain his innocence
and would appeal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We take a closer
look at the
significance of today's
conviction of the
Serbian leader with Nicholas
Burns. He was
a State Department spokesman
during the conflict
in Bosnia. He went on to become
undersecretary
of state for political affairs.
He is now
at Harvard university. And David
Rohde covered
the war in Bosnia for The
Christian Science
Monitor. He's the author of the
book "Endgame:
The Betrayal and Fall of
Srebrenica: Europe's
Worst Massacre Since World War
II." He's now
and editor at Reuters.
And we welcome both of you.
First of all, Nicholas Burns,
remind us. This
was a period almost a
quarter-century ago.
This is a small corner of
Europe. Remind us
who Radovan Karadzic was and
what happened.
NICHOLAS BURNS, Former U.S.
Undersecretary
of State for Political Affairs:
Well, Judy,
he was the leader of the Bosnian
Serbs. He
led that community and its
parliament.
This was a war by the Bosnian
Serbs to conquer
the Bosnian Muslims, to combat
the Croat community,
the Slovenian community as
Yugoslavia broke
up. The Serbs wanted to create a
greater Serbia.
And Karadzic and Ratko Mladic,
the general,
the leading general of the
Bosnian Serbs,
led a vicious campaign.
That war took 100,000 lives at
least, 2.5
million refugees, and it
culminated in this
great, great tragedy at
Srebrenica in July
1995, when the Bosnian Serbs,
under Karadzic's
orders, murdered 8,000 Muslim
men and boys
in two-and-a-half days in a
soccer stadium.
And that was the worst massacre
in Europe
since the Nazis.
It galvanized the United States
and Europe
to act, because we had not acted
sufficiently
between '91 and '95. And it led
to the U.S.
air campaign in September and
October of that
year, and it led to the Dayton
peace talks.
And that's where the peace was
made. So this
was a significant event in the
history of
Europe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Rohde, as a
reporter,
who covered that war, what would
you add?
DAVID ROHDE, Reuters: I would
just say, in
a sense, this is the largest
verdict, the
largest war crimes verdict in
Europe since
the Nuremberg trials.
Karadzic is the highest-level
civilian official
who will face justice, who has
faced justice.
Slobodan Milosevic, the former
president of
Serbia, would have been, but he
died in captivity.
So, it's an enormous verdict. I
was here in
New York today, and by chance,
the hostess
at a restaurant I was at was a
Bosnian American,
a Bosnian Muslim, and she burst
into tears
talking about, you know, the
fact that this
verdict had come down and he had
been convicted
of genocide.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, David Rohde,
staying with
you -- again, you covered that
war. What does
it mean to you, as somebody who
saw much of
this on the ground?
DAVID ROHDE: Well, it's
accountability.
There was a sense for years as
the war dragged
on, as Nic said, 100,000 people
were killed,
and NATO and the U.N. kept --
and the international
community said they were going
to act, but
they didn't act. And there was a
sense that
that emboldened the Bosnian
Serbs to do this.
And the real tragedy of
Srebrenica, the town
itself, it wasn't simply that
the world didn't
act. Srebrenica was declared a
United Nations
protected safe area. U.N.
peacekeepers went
in and they actually took away
the heavier
weapons that Bosnian Muslims in
the surrounding
town of Srebrenica had. And they
promised
that the U.N. and NATO would
protect them.
The Bosnian Muslims, with less
weaponry then,
weren't protected, the town was
overrun, and,
again, 8,000 men and boys
systematically executed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nicholas Burns,
why does it
matter that 20 -- again, almost
a quarter-of-a-century
later, someone like Radovan
Karadzic is held
accountable?
NICHOLAS BURNS: Well, Judy, the
arc of the
moral universe is long, but it
bends toward
justice. That's what Martin
Luther King said.
And he obviously was right.
Justice has been
done here.
This was genocide against an
entire people,
against a Muslim population, and
it took 21
very painful, very frustrating,
long years
for justice to work. But it has.
And so this
war crimes tribunal is very
important, as
has been the war crimes tribunal
in Rwanda,
where there was a genocide as
well the year
before.
And we in positions of power,
the United States
and other countries, have to see
justice as
a very important priority for us
and have
to see peace as an important
priority. So
I think it's very important that
these efforts
continue and that the United
States continues
to support them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Rohde, how,
looking back,
does one explain what happened
here? This
was, what, 50 years after World
War II, the
Holocaust in Germany. How do you
explain something
like this, this ethnic
cleansing, genocide
that took place?
DAVID ROHDE: Well, it was
disturbing. My time
speaking to Bosnian Serb
soldiers about this,
they saw themselves as the
victim of some
sort of giant Muslim conspiracy
to take over
Europe, and that they had to act
this way
to save Europe.
And they were deluded, but,
again, they were
abetted by a failure to act. We
see the consequences
of that in Syria today. It's not
that the
West has to necessarily act, but
it can't
promise to act. It can't, you
know, call for
President Assad to step down in
Syria, and
then not follow up on those
promises.
So, the real lesson of all this
is to not
promise to bring justice, to not
promise to
sort of remove a brutal leader
and then to
not act. That's the mistake. If
we're going
to do nothing, say nothing. But
it's the raising
the expectations and doing
nothing that then
emboldens the perpetrators of
these crimes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nicholas Burns,
why did the
U.S. and other nations wait so
long to get
involved here?
NICHOLAS BURNS: I think, on the
part of the
United States and the part of
President George
H.W. Bush and then Bill Clinton,
this was
a job that they thought the
Europeans would
handle.
The Europeans took this
opportunity to say,
we will be the ones that will
lead here. They
were incapable of doing that,
unfortunately.
The United Nations and the
Europeans did not
have a significant enough
mission.
What really turned this whole
war was that
massacre at Srebrenica. I think,
Judy, it
shamed the United States, it
shamed Europe
into acting. And we had two
things that ended
this war. It was the decision by
President
Clinton -- and he was right --
to use military
force, an air campaign against
the Bosnian
Serbs in September and October
of 1995, and
then the brilliant diplomacy of
the late Ambassador
Richard C. Holbrooke.
It was his will, his
determination to see
a peace made at Dayton that I
think was the
singular factor that that war
ended. And we
should pay tribute to Ambassador
Holbrooke,
to Dick Holbrooke, and remember
him today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, David Rohde,
what does
this verdict mean, if anything,
for the people
of Bosnia today?
DAVID ROHDE: To be frank, it's
not a great
situation in Bosnia today.
There's a sense that the
international community
has shifted away from there.
There's a need
to sort of reform the
constitution that was
created after the Dayton
accords. And there's
concern that if not -- if there
isn't more
engagement there, there could be
more division.
The current leader of the
Bosnian Serbs, Milorad
Dodik, just recently as last
week dedicated
a new dormitory for university
students. That
dormitory is named after Radovan
Karadzic,
the man convicted of genocide
today. So we
have to keep our eye on Bosnia
and follow
through, huge step forward
today, but more
work to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we thank
both of you
very much for reminding us of
the significance
of all of this.
David Rohde, Nicholas Burns, we
thank you
both.
NICHOLAS BURNS: Thank you.
DAVID ROHDE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn now to
North Carolina,
where a new measure restricting
protections
for gay, lesbian, bisexual, and
transgender
people is being called the
toughest law of
its kind in the nation.
We begin our story with
Wednesday's dramatic
emergency session of state
lawmakers.
John Yang reports.
JOHN YANG: Senate Democrats
walked out in
protest, leaving their empty
chairs.
MAN: Thirty-two having voted in
the affirmative
and zero in the negative, House
Bill 2 passes.
JOHN YANG: The vote repealed a
new ordinance
in Charlotte, North Carolina,
that expanded
protections for LGBTQ people,
including letting
transgender people choose which
bathroom to
use. The new state law goes even
further,
barring any city from passing
anti-discrimination
laws in the future.
Lawmakers heard testimony on
both sides.
SARAH PRESTON, American Civil
Liberties Union
of North Carolina: Half of the
transgender
individuals surveyed in North
Carolina recently
reported being harassed in
public accommodations.
CHLOE JEFFERSON, Student: What
about my rights
to privacy and wishes not to be
exposed to
young males changing and
showering beside
me?
JOHN YANG: Late Wednesday night,
Republican
Governor Pat McCrory signed it
into law, saying
in a statement that Charlotte
violated "the
basic expectation of privacy in
the most personal
of settings, a restroom or
locker room."
He accused the leaders of the
state's largest
city of government overreach and
intrusion.
Charlotte Mayor Jennifer
Roberts, a Democrat,
fired back.
JENNIFER ROBERTS (D), Mayor of
Charlotte,
North Carolina: This legislation
is literally
the most anti-LGBT legislation
in the country.
And it does this not just in
Charlotte, but
all across our state.
JOHN YANG: Activists and legal
rights groups,
like the ACLU, say they're
already exploring
a court challenge to the law.
We explore this issue at the
local and national
level with Loretta Boniti,
senior political
reporter for Time Warner Cable
News in North
Carolina, and Dominic Holden,
national LGBT
reporter for BuzzFeed News.
Dominic and Loretta, thanks for
joining us.
Loretta, let me start with you.
You covered this legislative
action yesterday.
As I understand it, the
Charlotte ordinance
that this is targeting hasn't
even gone into
effect yet. Did the legislative
leaders say
why they felt the need for a
special session
here?
LORETTA BONITI, Time Warner
Cable News North
Carolina: Well, the legislative
leaders said
that they could have waited
until after the
ordinance went into effect on
April 1, but
they thought it was smart not to
let it go
into effect and then to go back
and say, by
the way, no, you can't do that
once they go
into their special session on
April -- or
their regular session on April
25.
So, they said, we should come
back beforehand
and never let this go into
effect. And they
felt like this was necessary,
even though
the governor had said he thought
that they
could wait until the end of
April to take
care of this.
JOHN YANG: A lot of the
discussion that I
heard, Loretta, on the floor
debate focused
on the provision about allowing
transgender
people to choose which bathroom
the use.
Do you think, if that -- if it
hadn't been
for that, they might not have
acted so quickly?
LORETTA BONITI: I think that's
the issue that
really prompted folks to say
that they needed
to come back. That's what they
were getting
the phone calls from, from their
constituents,
saying that, to them, this seems
like something
that was a concern. They say it
was a safety
concern. They wanted to make
sure that someone
who is biologically a male
cannot go into
a female restroom legally in
North Carolina.
And they said they wanted to
stop that from
happening before it became law.
JOHN YANG: Dominic, help us put
this in perspective.
How does both what Charlotte did
in their
ordinance and what the North
Carolina state
legislature did fit into the
spectrum, as
it were, of what's going on
around the country
in city councils and in state
legislatures?
DOMINIC HOLDEN, BuzzFeed: What
the city council
did in Charlotte was very common
in the United
States. There are about 200
cities with ordinances
like these that ban
discrimination against
LGBT people.
What the lawmakers did in the
North Carolina
capitol in response is
increasingly common
this year. There were more than
100 bills
filed that target LGBT people in
some way,
an unprecedented number, and
that is seen
as a backlash to the decision
last year by
the U.S. Supreme Court, which
allowed marriage
in all 50 states between
same-sex couples.
These bills have a number of
forms. Some of
them are religious protection
bills, such
as one in Missouri, and another
one in Georgia
right now, although the one in
North Carolina
was somewhat unique, in that it
combined two
other types of bills we have
seen.
One is a preemption bill that
overrides local
jurisdictions, and the other
would ban transgender
students from school restrooms
that correspond
with their gender identity. And
so North Carolina
put these two together.
And the second one about banning
students
from school restrooms is the
first of its
kind in the entire country. And
there are
questions then raised about what
this means
legally for the state. The Obama
administration
has said that civil rights laws
ban that sort
of discrimination against
transgender people
in schools, and so this seems
like it's ripe
for a legal challenge.
JOHN YANG: And, Dominic, have
local communities
been establishing rights for
transgender people
in terms of restrooms? Is that
something that
we're seeing a lot of, or is it
just because
of Caitlyn Jenner we're paying
more attention
to it?
DOMINIC HOLDEN: This is very
standard.
So, the way that many of these
laws are written
is that they ban discrimination
on the basis
of sexual orientation or gender
identity in
places of employment, in
housing, and in public
accommodation. And this is
widely been interpreted
to say that transgender people
can use restrooms
that correspond with their
gender identity.
There are 17 states with such
laws, more than
200 cities, but, in recent
times, the last
few years in particular,
conservative activists
have latched onto this to
suggest that there
is some sort of safety threat
presented.
JOHN YANG: Loretta, what's been
the reaction
around North Carolina,
particularly the business
community, which has been
important in these
cases in other states?
LORETTA BONITI: We have heard a
lot from the
business community come out and
say that they
really don't like the sounds of
this law.
I think they're still trying to
figure out
exactly what it will do here in
North Carolina.
We haven't heard anybody come
outright and
say, well, I'm leaving North
Carolina because
of this law, but we have several
big businesses,
like Red Hat, American Airlines
that are based
here who have said they don't
like the way
that this law works. And,
obviously, when
you start seeing big businesses
like that
speak out against something,
that will lead
to probably a ripple effect of
more and more
businesses coming out against
it.
JOHN YANG: Dominic, you
mentioned the same-sex
marriage decision by the Supreme
Court last
year. We have also seen gays in
the military
issue being resolved. Is this
now the new
battleground for LGBTQ rights in
state legislatures
over issues like this?
DOMINIC HOLDEN: After marriage
equality, there's
no question that the primary
interests of
the LGBT movement is to pass
nondiscrimination
protections federally.
Where they're running into
problems is on
the local level with this issue
about bathrooms.
But it's important to note that
in the 200
cities and 17 states with laws
like this already
on the books, there are no
examples documented
of someone using it for
nefarious purposes,
of a transgender person who is
this sex predator
in the bathroom.
It's got no factual foothold. If
anything,
the irony in this is that it
actually would
require -- and North Carolina
now requires
transgender men who have beards,
who are muscular,
to use the women's restroom. So
it actually
creates the very problem that it
claims to
solve.
Nonetheless, it's really put
LGBT advocates
in a difficult place because
they haven't
figured out how to respond to
this. And for
the most part, they have not
taken it on directly.
JOHN YANG: Dominic Holden,
Loretta Boniti,
thanks very much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": why
economists
missed the anger that led to the
rise of Trumpism;
and with big banks in the
political spotlight,
we sit down with Barney Frank;
plus, an inventor's
take on death and technology.
There's no question that one of
the key issues
in this election year has been
the frustration
of workers over wages, debt and
a sense of
economic stagnation in too many
households.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman,
recently sat down with Robert
Reich to hear
a more progressive take on these
issues.
Tonight, Paul gets a more
conservative view
on how it helps explain the
Trump phenomenon.
It's part of his weekly
reporting on financial
news, Making Sense, which airs
every Thursday.
MAN: The poor are getting
everything for free,
and the rich are getting all the
tax breaks.
PAUL SOLMAN: Marginalized for so
long, economically
anxious voters are now center
stage in the
daily drama of the presidential
campaign.
MAN: I am currently unemployed.
I think the
middle class, they really don't
really care
about as much as they should.
WOMAN: I lost my job, so my one
full-time
job is now three part-time jobs.
WOMAN: That's what America
needs. That's what
the people need. They need their
jobs back.
PAUL SOLMAN: To which Donald
Trump responds
loud and clear.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I will be the greatest
jobs-producing president
that God ever created.
PAUL SOLMAN: Economics is a key
driver of
the voter anger Charles Murray
calls Trumpism,
conservative Charles Murray,
who's been a
lightning rod of controversy
since "The Bell
Curve," his co-authored book of
the 1990s
on genetics and economic
success.
What is Trumpism?
CHARLES MURRAY, American
Enterprise Institute:
Trumpism is the expression by
the white working
class of a lot of legitimate
grievances that
it has with the ruling class.
Everything from the cultural
disdain that
the ruling class holds the
working class in,
to the loss of all kinds of
manufacturing
jobs, the importation of
low-skilled labor,
all the ways in which, if you're
a member
of the working class, you have
over the last
30 or 40 years been screwed.
PAUL SOLMAN: Murray says he
would never vote
for Donald Trump, but he's been
forced to
acknowledge the appeal of, say,
Trump's diatribes
against outsourcing jobs.
MAN: The best way to stay
competitive is to
move production from our
facility in Indianapolis
to Monterrey, Mexico.
PAUL SOLMAN: This cell phone
video gone viral
from February showed workers, at
an Indianapolis
Carrier plant, getting
prospective pink slips.
Although it's been widely
reported that Donald
Trump's own products are made
overseas, on
the campaign trail, he denounced
Carrier,
and issued a threat.
DONALD TRUMP: I'm going to call
up Carrier,
and I'm going to tell the head
of Carrier,
I hope you enjoy your stay in
Mexico, folks,
but every single unit that you
make and send
across our border, which now
will be real,
you're going to pay a 35 percent
tax.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: No more Oreos.
PAUL SOLMAN: And there's the
campaign chant
Trump initiated after Oreo maker
Nabisco said
it was moving jobs from Chicago
to Mexico.
DONALD TRUMP: No more Oreos. Oh,
it's going
to be tough getting off Oreos.
PAUL SOLMAN: Another familiar,
yet grave grievance
of Trump supporters, insourcing
of cheap labor
via immigration. The recent
furor over it
has forced Charles Murray to
change his mind.
CHARLES MURRAY: I have always
believed in
enforcing the border, and doing
that before
you do amnesty. I have always
considered myself
to be, you know, very stern on
those issues.
But I also have not written
about saying,
maybe we shouldn't have so many
low-skilled
people coming in anymore, and
because my libertarian
principles are in favor of
immigration and
all that. And until the last few
months, it
didn't hit home to me the degree
to which
the immigration policy that I,
as one of the
elites, find good is good only
because I don't
pay any of the price for it.
PAUL SOLMAN: And that's the
great revelation
of Trumpism.
CHARLES MURRAY: That the ruling
class in this
country is governing in its own
self-interest,
and ignoring the legitimate
complaints of
the working class and, for that
matter, of
the middle class.
PAUL SOLMAN: I spent a day with
Murray in
2012, exploring his book on
inequality, "Coming
Apart." It featured a "Do you
live in a bubble?"
quiz.
CHARLES MURRAY: And I got a
really high score,
because, after all, I made up
the quiz. So,
I'm supposedly not in the bubble
at all.
PAUL SOLMAN: Right.
CHARLES MURRAY: But I have been
shocked by
the degree of self-recognition
of the ways
that I, too, am in the bubble,
except it's
been an unpleasant shock, and
it's because
of the presidential campaign.
PAUL SOLMAN: Though he lives in
a small town
in rural Maryland, by education,
income and
social class, Murray now
realizes he is also
in an elitist bubble.
CHARLES MURRAY: You now have the
option of
going to live in communities
which are filled
with interesting people, people
who do share
your tastes and preferences, who
get your
jokes, who know about the
allusions, who,
for that mater, share your
politics. That's
happening all the time.
PAUL SOLMAN: While so many
average Americans
pine for the good old days.
MAN: Make America great again $5
rally flag
right here. I got one left. Who
wants it?
PAUL SOLMAN: But popular TV, a
product of
those in the upper echelons,
makes fun of
those below.
ACTRESS: The plant called and
said, if you
don't come in tomorrow, don't
bother coming
in Monday.
ACTOR: Woo-hoo! Four-day
weekend.
CHARLES MURRAY: There is one
group that is
more consistently portrayed as
ineffectual,
as unvirtuous, as incompetent,
as objects
of fun, and that is white
working class guys.
ACTOR: Evel Knievel gloves. I
bet I could
do a wheelie with these. How
much for the
gloves?
ACTOR: Peter, those are yours.
ACTOR: Ten bucks, two, seven,
four, 5.50,
10. Sold. Sucker, I would have
gone to 15
easy. I am so stupid.
PAUL SOLMAN: How much of the
anxiety and resentment
of the working middle class is
due, do you
think, to the attitude of the
elites in this
country with respect to those
working middle-class
people?
CHARLES MURRAY: A big chunk. You
don't think
that they don't notice when we
talk about
flyover country? Try to think of
any kind
of ethnic slur that you can get
away with
at a dinner party you attend
without getting
immediate pushback.
PAUL SOLMAN: Oh, you would get
kicked out
of the room.
CHARLES MURRAY: I will give you
one. I will
give you an ethnic slur where
you won't. Try
it out at your next dinner
party. Refer to
rednecks.
Talk to a friend of mine who
bought a weekend
place in West Virginia, and have
him tell
you what his Georgetown
neighbors said without
the slightest sense of shame
about their expectations
of what his neighbors would be
like, that
they would be dumb, illiterate,
have missing
teeth.
PAUL SOLMAN: It's not as if
Trump supporters
like John Lehanka haven't
noticed the condescension.
JOHN LEHANKA, Trump Supporter:
We're not stupid.
We're not clowns. We're not
zombies. We know
what we want. We want America to
be great
again.
PAUL SOLMAN: As any number of
recent plays
illustrate, many artists have
deep sympathy
for the economically
subordinated.
ACTOR: They squeeze us like a
sponge. They
drain out every last drop of
blood, and then
they throw us away.
PAUL SOLMAN: Though, arguably,
the artists
are members of the elite
themselves, not to
mention their audiences.
ACTOR: I thought I would be
settled by my
age, but, man, it never ends.
Mortgage, car
payments, Internet. Our
dishwasher just gave
out.
ACTOR: Oh, man.
ACTOR: Yes. Yes. Don't you think
it should
cost less to be alive?
PAUL SOLMAN: And yet, says
Murray, even the
most aware among the socially
elite have done
little to cut the widening
distance between
them and more typical Americans.
CHARLES MURRAY: There is a sense
that the
people who run the country are a
separate
group of people who don't like
them, who don't
understand them, and who have
been punishing
them.
PAUL SOLMAN: Donald Trump's
sales pitch, of
course, is that he does
understand them, and
will protect them.
DONALD TRUMP: We're going to
build a wall,
folks. Don't worry about it.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," this
is economics correspondent Paul
Solman.
DONALD TRUMP: Who is going to
pay for the
wall?
AUDIENCE: Mexico!
DONALD TRUMP: Who?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And on our Web
site, you can
take Charles Murray's bubble
quiz to see if
you live in a social and
cultural bubble.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
you live in a social and
cultural bubble.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now our conversation series on
another economic
issue that's been a major theme
on the campaign
trail this year: Are some banks
still too
big to fail, and do they pose a
risk to the
country?
Jeffrey Brown has our latest
interview.
JEFFREY BROWN: In our first
conversation,
we talked with Neel Kashkari,
president of
the Federal Reserve Bank in
Minneapolis. As
a Treasury official during the
financial crisis,
he helped oversee the bailout of
the banks.
He now argues that the system
remains in danger
and that giant financial firms
should be broken
up.
That's a view being heard on the
campaign
trail from Senator Bernie
Sanders.
In his interview with Judy
yesterday, here's
how he described the problem and
his plan
for it.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
It will be important to point
out that three
out of the four largest banks in
this country
today are bigger than they were
when we bailed
them out because they were too
big to fail,
that you have the six largest
banks in this
country that have assets of 58
percent of
our GDP.
I happen the believe that when
you have a
few financial institutions with
unbelievable
economic power, with
unbelievable financial
power, that what we should do is
reestablish
a modern Glass-Steagall
legislation, and what
we should do, in fact, is break
them up, not
only from a risk perspective of
not seeing
their greed and illegal behavior
destroy our
economy, as happened eight years
ago, but
also from creating a competitive
financial
system, where we don't have so
few financial
institutions with so much power.
JEFFREY BROWN: And we get a
response now from
one of the leading players in
the aftermath
of the financial crisis.
Barney Frank served as a
Democratic congressman
from Massachusetts from 1981
until his retirement
in 2013. As chairman of the
House Financial
Services Committee, he played a
lead role
in crafting the Dodd-Frank law,
which enacted
the most sweeping changes to
U.S. financial
regulation since the Great
Depression.
Welcome back to you.
The starting point of the
critique we have
heard is that the banks are
bigger than ever,
the potential for another
bailout remains
strong. Dodd-Frank was a start,
but didn't
go nearly far enough.
Do you see a different picture?
BARNEY FRANK (D), Former
Massachusetts Congressman:
Oh, very much so.
In the first place, both Senator
Sanders and
Mr. Kashkari continue to evade
the biggest
question. That is, how big is
too big? The
crisis which touched off when
Lehman Brothers
couldn't make its payment,
was about $650 billion in
assets. We have
banks four and five times that
size
And the question is, does
everybody have to
be smaller than Lehman Brothers
is today?
But that would have
consequences. Getting
there would be a problem. By the
way, it should
be very clear, Glass-Steagall
doesn't do it.
There is a disconnect between
Senator Sanders
insisting that the banks be
broken down to
the point where they won't by
their own size
threaten, if they have too much
debt, to undermine
it.
And Glass-Steagall --
Glass-Steagall would
reduce -- it wouldn't do
anything to Goldman
Sachs and to Morgan Stanley,
which are almost
Glass-Steagall-ized themselves.
But looked
at Citicorp, or J.P. Morgan
Chase, or Bank
of America, Wells Fargo, even if
they were
subject to Glass-Steagall, they
would still
be well beyond the size that
Lehman Brothers
was.
There is just a disconnect
between saying
we're going to do Glass-Steagall
and getting
the banks down to a size where,
if there was
a complete failure, you would
get damaged
by it.
JEFFREY BROWN: But let me ask
you about the
too big -- the size question,
because when
I talked to Neel Kashkari, for
example, he
cited the example of the S&L
crisis, where
you had maybe 1,000 institutions
go under,
but the system wasn't at risk.
So, why not -- are you saying
that size...
BARNEY FRANK: Excuse me. Did
you...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Go ahead.
BARNEY FRANK: I'm saying size is
a factor,
but did you ask Mr. Kashkari how
big was too
big? That's a major factor.
By the way, it cost us more --
the S&L crisis
cost the taxpayers more than the
TARP did
in 2008. So, I don't know why he
would cite
that. In fact, the failure of a
very large
number of smaller institutions
turned out
to be much more expensive to the
taxpayers.
In fact, as far as the bailout
of 2008 was
concerned, we made money on that
in the money
that was extended to financial
institutions.
And, by the way, it wasn't just
to big ones
then. It was to small ones as
well. The only
institutions that weren't able
to pay us back
were the auto companies. And I
don't think
-- I thought it was a good idea
to pay them.
As to size, the question is not
just to the
size, but what would happen if
they couldn't
pay their debts. And that's what
people ignore.
We did two things in the
legislation to deal
with that. First of all, we made
it much,
much less likely that they would
get so indebted
that they couldn't pay them
back.
It's not their overall size.
It's the indebtedness
that's the threat. You could not
now have
an AIG, which got itself $170
billion beyond
what it could pay off in
derivatives, because
we do not allow institutions
under the law
now to get so indebted without
the capital
to back it up.
Secondly and most importantly,
what we said
is this: If a large institution
can't pay
its debts, it fails. It is not
too big to
fail. It is put out of business,
by law. No
federal official can advance any
money to
pay its debts under the law
until it is dissolved.
What then happens is this: It
may be that
we would have to borrow from the
taxpayers
to pay some of the debts, not
all, as the
previous law required, but if we
have to pay
some of the debts to prevent the
failure of
a large institution from having
serious economic
consequences, the treasury
secretary is mandated
by law to recover every penny
from large -- other
large financial institutions.
And, again, it's not the size of
the institution,
but the size of the unpaid
indebtedness. Well,
we have dealt with that by
reducing the indebtedness
and requiring that the
institution will be
dissolved if it fails.
JEFFREY BROWN: What about the
argument from
Senator Sanders, we just heard
it -- and I
think we should say you're a
supporter of
Hillary Clinton in the
Democratic presidential
race -- but what about the
argument from Senator
Sanders on the political issue,
the political
power of banks who have, as he
said -- he
said six of them have assets
totaling 50 percent
of the U.S. GDP.
Is that a problem for our
democracy?
BARNEY FRANK: No, I don't think
-- the problem
for our democracy is the one
that both Senator
Sanders and Hillary Clinton
would fix, unlike
the Republicans.
That would be to appoint a
Supreme Court justice
who would overturn the Citizens
United decision,
which allows money to go in
uninhibited. I
will tell you this. In the
legislation in
2008 -- and people who study
this understand
it -- it was the community banks
that had
more power than the big banks.
We did several
things in that bill that favored
the small
banks other over the bigger
banks.
There is a threat, if they are
so indebted,
that their debts don't get paid
and they solve
-- they cause an economic
crisis. That's the
one I believe we have addressed.
By the way,
once again, with Glass-Steagall
-- and I would
ask you, did you ask either
Senator Sanders
or Mr. Kashkari how big was too
big?
How can someone claim to be
responsibly advocating
reducing the size of the
institution without
ever telling you what size they
have to be
reduced? That's a fundamental
question.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, I can just
tell you that...
BARNEY FRANK: I think -- yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: I will just tell
you that Mr.
Kashkari said he was going the
study it this
year. So that's -- I did ask.
BARNEY FRANK: Oh. In other
words, he came
out -- that's pretty
irresponsible. I think,
frankly, Mr. Kashkari is acting
still more
like the candidate for governor
he was in
California than a Federal
Reserve official.
And I think the answer is that
it might be
too small for them to want to
stand behind
that. But I want to get back to
the political
point.
Glass-Steagall, which is Senator
Sanders'
only remedy, doesn't resolve
that problem.
People should understand
Glass-Steagall doesn't
break them into three and four
and five pieces.
Glass-Steagall says to Citicorp
and Bank of
America and J.P. Morgan Chase,
you cannot
have a securities division, as
well as a commercial
bank decision.
Now, the Volcker rule already
reduces their
securities decision. But if you
applied Glass-Steagall
to those institutions, you
wouldn't significantly
diminish their size, certainly
not below the
level that Lehman Brothers was
in 2008.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
Barney Frank, thank you so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now to
another in our Brief
But Spectacular series.
Tonight, we hear from inventor
and futurist
Ray Kurzweil about immortality
and the exponential
growth of technology. Since
2012, Kurzweil
has been a director of
engineering at Google.
RAY KURZWEIL, Director of
Engineering, Google:
Our immediate reaction to death
is that it's
a tragedy. And that's really the
correct reaction.
We have rationalized it, saying,
oh, that
tragic thing that's looming,
that's actually
a good thing. But now we can
actually seriously
talk about a scenario where we
will be able
to extend our longevity
indefinitely.
I decided to become an inventor
when I was
5. I would bring back broken
bicycles, radios.
This was an era where you would
allow a 5-year-old
to roam the neighborhood and do
this. And
I had this idea, if I could just
figure out
how to put all these things
together, I could
solve any problem.
I wrote a program that could
recognize the
patterns in melodies from famous
composers
and write original music. So I
went on this
show "I've Got a Secret" hosted
by Steve Allen.
My name is Raymond Kurzweil, and
I'm from
Queens, New York.
STEVE ALLEN, Host: Queens, New.
RAYMOND KURZWEIL: And my secret
was, I had
built and programmed a computer
that composed
music.
I created a program that could
recognize printed
letters in any type and created
a reading
machine for the blind.
Probably, the most important
theme I have
talked about is the exponential
growth of
information technology. Price,
performance,
and capacity of information
technology progresses
predictably and exponentially.
It doubles
every period of time.
So, this little computer is
actually billions
of times more powerful per
dollar than the
computer I used when I was an
undergraduate.
We will do that again in the
next 25 years.
And we will have computers the
size of blood
cells, little robotic devices
that can go
through our bloodstream, its
capability thousands
or millions-fold by connecting
to the cloud.
That's a 2030s scenario.
We have been expanding our life
expectancy
for thousands of years. It was
19 1,000 years
ago, 37 in 1800. We're going to
get to a point
10, 15 years from now where
we're adding more
time than is going by to our
remaining life
expectancy.
People say, oh, I don't want to
live past
90, but, you know, I talk to
90-year-olds,
and they definitely want to live
to 91 and
to 100. People sometimes say
that death gives
meaning to life because it makes
time short,
but, actually, death is a great
robber of
meaning, of relationships, of
knowledge.
We're going to be able to
overcome disease
and aging. Most of our thinking
will be nonbiological.
That will be backed up, so part
of it gets
wipes away, you can recreate it.
And we will
be able to extend our lives
indefinitely.
I would rather use that word
than forever.
My name is Ray Kurzweil, and
this is my Brief
But Spectacular take on our
exponential future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
more Brief
But Spectacular episodes on our
Facebook page.
That's Facebook.com/"NewsHour."
On the "NewsHour" online, in our
weekly Medicare
column, a reader wants to know
why she was
charged an exorbitant fee for
medication she
received in a hospital.
Journalist Philip
Moeller writes that Medicare
drug coverage
can be very confusing, with
several different
parts. He explains them each
week in his Ask
Phil column, and you can read
this week's
on our home page. That's
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.